In this video I'm going to explain the softmax function, the softmax operation to you.
The math of the softmax function is actually fairly straightforward.
So I'm going to spend more time talking about the interpretation and the purpose of softmax in the context
of deep learning.
And then I'll also show you how to implement the softmax function in numpy and in PyTorch.
So before getting to the softmax function itself, I want to remind you or possibly introduce you to
the natural exponent, which is often given the letter e.
This is a constant.
It's a number, a scalar, we would say in linear algebra and it's approximately equal to 2.718 and
so on.
In fact this never ends.
This number never ends.
It's an irrational number kind of like pi.
So it just goes on and on and on without any pattern.
Now here is the graph of e to the power of x for lots of different values of x.
There's a few points that I would like to make a few observations about this graph.
One is that each of the x goes up to infinity really, really fast.
It goes up really super duper fast.
In fact, one of the interesting properties of E to the X is that it is its own derivative.
So the derivative of e to the x is also e to the x.
That's not actually relevant for deep learning.
But but that is pretty interesting about the function.
Second thing I would like to point out is that this is a strictly positive function, so it never goes
below zero.
You can see even when x is negative.
So we have e to the minus three.
For example, the function value of e to the minus three is never going to be negative.
It's it's always positive.
In fact it also never gets to be zero.
It gets arbitrarily close to zero as x goes out to minus infinity, but this is always a positive construction.
The output of this function is always positive.
That's important because one of the things we want to do with the natural exponent is use it in the
softmax function.
In order to generate probabilities, and probabilities must be positive values or at least non-negative
values.
Okay, so that's about the natural exponent.
This is the key to unlocking the secrets of the softmax function.
So here's the formula for the softmax function for a collection of numbers z.
So this would be the collection of numbers the softmax function or the softmax transformation.
For each element I in collection z equals e to the z sub I divided by the sum over all of the e to the
z for all the z's in that collection.
Okay.
Now, you know this is just a bunch of symbols and letters.
Oh, and it's often indicated using the lowercase sigma here.
So I want to attach a numerical example to this to help make sure that that this concept is clear.
Okay.
So let's start with our little data set of z equals 123.
So these are all positive values.
But that doesn't actually matter.
These values in themselves are not scale between 0 and 1.
That's what I want to mention.
In fact the sum of this set is six.
Okay.
So we take e to the z.
And that is these numbers like two to the 0.72 and 739 and 20.01.
In fact I'm just rounding here to two significant digits after the decimal point.
These numbers in fact, go on much longer okay.
And then we sum all of these values.
So the sum this is the denominator.
The sum of all the e to the z is just the sum of these three numbers.
And that ends up being a little bit over 30.
So then we divide e to the z by the for each element by the sum over all of the elements.
So now sigma the softmax transformation of this data set here this collection of numbers is these numbers.
So 0.090.24 and 0.67.
Now we can do some quick math in our head and confirm that all of these numbers sum to one.
So that's pretty easy to do by taking 0.03 out of this and and giving that to this guy.
So this becomes 0.7 here we have 0.06.
Add that to this.
This becomes 0.3 and 0.3 and 0.7 is one.
So when you sum up all of these softmax transformations of a set of numbers, then the softmax version
is always going to sum to one.
So all of these values are positive.
They're necessarily all positive because e to the z is always going to be positive.
In fact I'll show you in a couple slides I'll show you an example with negative numbers.
So all of these values are positive and they're all between 0 and 1.
And they all sum to one.
The collection of them sums to one.
Now that means that we can interpret these values, these softmax values, as probabilities.
Now just to be clear, that doesn't mean that these necessarily are probabilities.
For example, you know, this data set has 1112 and one three.
So the probability of picking a one at random is actually 0.33.
It's a third.
And likewise for these two.
So these are not probabilities of selecting each of the numbers in the data set.
These are just numerical transformations by applying this formula.
But because these softmax function has these special properties that all the values are between 0 and
1 and that they all sum to one, then that means that we can interpret these values in terms of probabilities.
And I'll explain how we do that or why we do that in deep learning in a few moments.
First, I want to give you a little bit of a sense of how to think about the softmax function.
So we can think of the softmax function as being a machine.
I call this machine the softmax riser.
And just to be clear, this is not a real term.
If you go to, you know, like your stats professor and you say, hey, I learned about the softmax
riser, your stats professor might not know what you're talking about.
So it's just a funny term that I thought might help you remember the softmax function.
So the softmax riser is a machine.
It takes input and it gives output.
And the input that it takes is some numerical quantities for various things in the universe.
These can be the counts of different things.
These can be guesses about the likelihood of something happening.
They can also be independent probabilities.
But these are just these are a collection of numbers, numerical values.
And then we apply the formula that I showed in the previous slide.
And the output is going to be something that we are going to interpret here.
For the context of deep learning, we are going to interpret the output of the softmax machine as being
the probability of thing one occurring, the probability of thing two occurring, and so on for all
of the things that we have measured.
So here we go.
This is the numerical example that I showed before.
Here are same computations.
I've just put them out to four decimal points here.
And here I'm showing you with the this middle number two being negative.
So exactly the same formula I applied exactly the same formula that I showed you a moment ago.
But here I just set two to be negative.
So you can see that these values change.
So here was with two being positive.
And here two transformed into 0.2.
Here minus two.
Notice this is the smallest number we have in this set.
And that gets converted into 0.006.
And also this number three got got considerably larger.
It was 0.66 here.
And now it's 0.87.
So what do we use the softmax for in deep learning.
Well we're going to be developing deep learning models that will learn to categorize data or predict
categories of data based on input values.
So we can think about a picture.
So let's say we input a picture an image.
And the deep learning network is going to output a bunch of numbers corresponding to different categories.
So thing one might be some numerical value corresponding to the category of cats.
Thing two might be the category of dogs, thing three is the category of cars, and thing N is the category
of coffee cups.
So what are these numerical values?
Well they're just they're kind of arbitrary values.
There's a lot of normalization and scaling that happens in deep learning.
There's lots of multiplications and sums and transformations.
There's linear and non-linear steps.
So these numbers that the deep learning network outputs on its own are not really interpretable.
We can't really just directly interpret those numbers.
So instead we take that collection of numbers, the outputs of the deep learning model.
And we plug it through this softmax layer.
And the output is a set of probability values.
So then the way we interpret this is that the model is saying that there is a you know, maybe it's
a 0.9 probability of this thing being a cat, this picture being a cat.
And maybe it's a 0.01 probability of this thing being a dog, and 0.01% probability of the picture being
a car.
And I forget what the other categories I named, but so we are going to take the collection of arbitrary
numerical values that on their own have no intrinsic interpretable values, and we are going to convert
them into probability values that map onto specific categories that the network is learning.
Here you see a collection or collections of input numbers and their transformed values after applying
the softmax function.
So in the previous slides I was showing you number a set of numbers one two, three.
And then I had one minus two and three.
Three is actually not on the chart here.
And so what I did in these plots is just repeat the same thing, but with numbers between minus two
and plus two.
So here there were five numbers between minus plus two, minus two and plus two.
Here there were more numbers and here even more numbers.
So these are the inputs on the x axis.
This would be like the output of the deep learning model which is the input to the softmax machine.
And then here we have the output of the softmax function the softmax transformation on the y axis.
And there's really two things that I want to point out here.
One is that we have a nonlinear increase here with larger numbers.
So negative numbers are small.
But notice you know there isn't much of a distance between -2 and -1 on the y axis.
Right.
So minus one is only a little bit higher than minus two.
On the other hand two is much much higher than one relatively you know, relative to to this change.
So we have this strong non-linearity here where larger numbers get a much, much larger softmax output.
And the second thing I want to point out here is to notice the y axis scaling here.
So here the numbers go up to 0.6 here to 0.25, and here up to 0.1.
Even though the bounds are exactly the same.
So the input numbers, the inputs to the softmax function always range from minus two to plus two and
all three of these graphs.
But here there's there's few numbers.
Here there's more numbers.
And here there's even more numbers.
So the question for you is why is that the case.
Why is the y axis scaling so different between these different graphs?
Well, the answer is that it's because we have more numbers here.
And the softmax output needs to sum to one.
So if you only have a couple of numbers and they all have to sum to one, those numbers have to be a
little bit larger.
If you add more and more numbers then you know, all else being equal, the numbers are going to be
smaller.
So it's a little misleading, I have to say to, to have these, um, different y axes because this
set here, this data set here, it goes up to 0.1.
If you would plot these values here on this graph, that would only go up to here.
Right.
Here's 0.1.
one.
So those this this data set here would only be plotted up to point one on this graph.
Okay.
So the sum over all the inputs can be any arbitrary numerical value.
It doesn't matter.
It depends on wherever the numbers happen to come from.
In fact, in these examples, all of these numbers on the y axis sum to one right.
So minus two plus minus one 012.
You sum all those numbers up you get to zero.
So the sum over the inputs is any arbitrary numerical value can be positive or negative or zero.
The sum over all the outputs of the softmax function are guaranteed to be one.
So the softmax function always makes sure that everything sums to one.
All right.
So now we are going to switch to Python.
And I'm going to show you how to compute the softmax operation in numpy and also in PyTorch.
So we need numpy.
You've already seen import torch.
You've seen this line in the past several videos.
I'm also going to be using a library of of the torch module called N for neural networks.
And it's often abbreviated as nn.
So torch dot n n we import as n n okay.
And then we're also going to do a bit of visualization.
I want to start by computing the softmax function manually in numpy.
So here we have a list of numbers.
We take the x the natural exponent of those numbers.
So e to the z here.
And then we compute the denominator which is the sum over all of those e to the z.
So the sum over this variable here which is the numerator.
And here I call this variable sigma to match the lowercase Greek letter that I showed in the slides.
So this is the output of the softmax function.
And the main reason why I'm showing you this written out manually is just to illustrate how easy it
actually is to compute the softmax function.
In fact, we don't even really need to break this up into three lines.
You could just do it in one line of code.
Okay.
And then here we see the individual numbers.
And of course these values match what I showed in the slides.
And then the sum over all of the outputs of the softmax function is one.
Okay.
And then here I'm just.
Yeah.
Well just doing it again with some random integers.
You can see I'm getting some negative numbers in here.
Positive numbers I'm including 25 numbers in total.
Of course I encourage you to play around with these parameters to explore this function on your own.
But the main thing I want to do is show you what this looks like in a graph.
So again these are the inputs into the softmax function.
And this is the output the softmax ified sigma I, I don't know if that's a real word.
Softmax ified.
And here in the title, we are confirming that the sum over all of the softmax values is indeed one.
Okay.
And then because this is a logarithmic function here, I thought it would also be interesting to change
the y axis scale to be logarithmic.
So you can see now we are increasing in log scale instead of linear scale.
And at this scale you see that this is a linear transformation.
So in log space we are actually simply linearly transforming the input values which are any arbitrary
number into the output values which are numbers that scale between 0 and 1 and which sum to one.
So in some sense, the softmax function is a linear operation a linear transformation in log space okay.
And if you're also a also relatively new to Python, then you can also check out how I created the Greek
characters in the title here by using Latech coding.
So you use dollar signs to tell Python that you're going to use a LaTeX code, and then the slash and
then the keyword of the particular special character that you want to use.
Okay.
So that was numpy.
Now I'm going to show you in PyTorch.
So now things are slightly different in PyTorch compared to numpy.
We are going to use a class we're going to call a class called softmax.
So neural networks dot softmax.
And then I'm creating here an instance of the softmax activation class.
So remember in the Python tutorial I showed you about classes and how to write your own classes.
Here we are calling up a class from the PyTorch library.
So we create this instance of the class.
And then I'm applying this function which I call soft fun or sorry I'm applying the data to that function.
And then here I'm also using the same variable z.
But this z is a list actually.
Maybe I will first delete this just to show you what happens if we try to input a list into this PyTorch
function.
Okay, so we get an error message.
And the error message is on this line here.
And the error message says that the numpy array has no attribute softmax.
So remember I told you when I introduced you to classes that classes have attributes and methods.
And actually I forgot that that we created we overwrote z to be a numpy array of random integers.
So let me run this code again.
So just to reset z to be a list.
Although it doesn't matter we're still going to get an error message here okay.
So here we have the same issue.
Just a different data type.
Okay.
So now I will undo here.
So what we are doing here is converting this list into a PyTorch tensor.
And then we can input that into the softmax function here.
And ultimately the results are the same.
The data type is slightly different.
The numbers are the same.
And just to make this a little bit more clear, to give you a little bit more of an intro into PyTorch,
we write the the type of list.
So the data type of list sorry of Z is a list.
And then we say the type of torch dot tensor.
So we are just transforming this list into a PyTorch tensor object okay.
And then here, well it's just a little plot to show that the sigma from numpy and the sigma from PyTorch
give us the same results.
And not surprisingly, they're correlated at exactly one.